Class : 1
MCSE - Microsoft Certified System Engineer
previously called as MCITP Mircosoft certified IT Professional
at that time we used 2008 Server OS - but it is outdated now
Currently we are using 2012 server OS  and 2016 server OS
By Completing the course we can become Mircosoft System Administrator
This is Hardware related course
software admin - Java, C++, Python Etc.
Hardware - MCSE, Linux - Hardware IT Professional
IT Jobs - Level Wise :
1. Desktop Admin - Learn Basic Course - Hardware and Networking
Activities :
Arrange all the machines
Plug the machine
Check the OS working or not
Printer connecting
Mouse, Keyboard issues and replacement

2. System Admin :
Do the course - MSCE 

Day to Day Activities :
maintain Network
Deploying & Managing server
Manager Client server
Manage user accounts and password
User permissions
manage user profiles
Group Policies - setting time for users when they want to login or logout.
manage web servers
managing the FTP servers

3. Network Admin :

System admin can do the work for Network admin work and do the courses like CCNA and CCNP
manage the routers and switches.
how to configure the router from one branch to another branch so as to get the data easily available to user.

Security Admin - there are courses like CCSP - Cybersecurity professional course using ethical hacking.
Any hacker is attacking our network - he or she need to protect it from hackers
On premises :
managing the server and desinging it according to our private network within the network.
Now a days companies are moving to cloud technology and saving all the data in cloud
cloud courses like Azure, AWS, GCP - Triple the salaries of System admin 
Devops - Dev + Ops
Dev - MCSE, CCNA, CCNP
Ops - to make it easy for end user - course to do is Java, Python etc
Troubleshooting - wherever we have problems and network stuck sometimes - at that time we will solve the issues.

Features of Windows Server 2012 
64 Bit OS
Easy Installation
Bit - 0 and 1 - our processor is designed on two tech - 32bit and 64bit
X86 - 32 Bit
X64 - 64 Bit - it is faster
All the softwares are designed in 32 bit and 64 bit
64 bit should be there for 2012 & 2016 installation server
OS supports Cloud Infrastructure  - how to move to on premise that means data to cloud
Improve server manager :
it is dashboard - used for activate the services - deactivate the services - control the OS
Customized Dashboard - it will show the services which are active and inactive
Remote Management of Server core and full - services offered to user without going to user place
manage or remove the services remotely
MS OS - 90% of companies using MS OS 
MSCE importance - it supports all the softwares and applications so it is compantible.
it is GUI as well as user friendly
GUI - full installion - with apps
Server core - command based system - only CMD will be avaialable in Server core OS
all the desktop icons are available in GUI OS
Active Directory :
we can create the Domain model
we can design our own server
 server / Adc/ Client /user accounts etc
we can create child domain controller - CDC
Admin center & Recycle bin - if user accounts are deleted then we can recover from recycle bin
Domain services - desing the server like Member server
Federation services and light weight directory services
certificate services and rights management services - giving authentication for particular servers
Inbuilt GPMC :
dont allow the users to change the desktop wallpaper or deny the permission for USB devices so to not copy the data
GPMC - Group Policy Management Console
Centralized deployment of apps - restrict the user to install the apps in system but can download them .
while we work on server we can install the apps on user system or push from backend like system updates
Disk Quota :
Storage limit for users to save the data , it differs according to the client availability
Distributed File System :
By giving one name , a user can access to multiple share drives
Windows server backup :
to backup the drive or data which are required to restore the deleted files
DNS Dependency :
with the help of DNS , we can assign the name for the server so as to get the access to certain servers like
attending the class by cisco
we can see servers like HTTP, HTTPS, FTP .
Improved Virtualization services :
it means when we use multiple servers in one system , then we can easily operate many systems at a time.
To reduce the cost and storage, this services are used.
Hyper - V replica - replication of same OS to another severs.
Dynamic memory
Enhanced Windows Deployment services :
Deploy OS with or without Active Directory
within one hour time we can install OS by using WDS.
Windows server core :
To convert from core to GUI and vice versa.
Network Access protection :
To check the protection of system like Antivirus updates.
Improved DHCp server :
To Maintain the IP address for all computers 
easy to switch by using the address to connect user desktop
Improved Security :
To deny the permission for unknown users to access the system or login into system
Kerberos Version5
Internet protocal security - PPTP , SSTP, IKEV2
WSUS - Windows update server

Requirements of lab practice :
processor - I5 or I7
Speed - 2GHz - Min - 1.4 GHz
Processor should have Virtulization.
Ram shoould be 8GB Ram
Hard Disk - 100GB free space
CMD - Systeminfo 

Downloading Part :
Windows Server 2012
Windows server 2016 
Windows Server 2010
VMWare application
Links for downloading :
https://zoomgroup.com/mcse-linux-registration.asp
https://www.microsoft.com/en-in/evalcenter/evaluate-windows-server-2012-r2
ISO file
name
company name
company size 5-9
system administration
windows server 2016
vmware download
https://www.vmware.com/in/products/workstation-pro/workstation-pro-evaluation.html
VMWare
Serial keys:
ZF3R0-FHED2-M80TY-8QYGC-NPKYF
YF390-0HF8P-M81RQ-2DXQE-M2UT6
ZF71R-DMX85-08DQY-8YMNC-PPHV8
AZ3E8-DCD8J-0842Z-N6NZE-XPKYF
FC11K-00DE0-0800Z-04Z5E-MC8T6


Class : 2

Introduction to Computers :
A computer is 	an electronic device which takes input through input devices and gives output throough output devices.

History :

Ist Gen - 1937 - 18000 Vacuum tubes weight 30tonnes
2nd Gen - 1947 - Transistor
3rd Gen - 1963 -Intel core Processor - mainframe servers.
4th Gen - 1980 - Nano processor.

It also stores the data
computer works with 0's and 1's
computer required DC current supply.
Input unit - Data given to the Computer 
CPU - Memory unit - ALU - control unit 
output unit - gives the resutls 
MotherBoard - it is brain of computer
Processor - i3 or i5 ior AMD
Primary storage devices like 
RAM - Random access memory
ROM - Read only memory
Secondary Storage Devices : 
HDD - Hard Disk Drive
Optical Disk Drive ( CD ROM , DVD )
Floppy Disk Drive
SMPS - Switched Mode Power Supply
Input Devices - Keyboard, Mouse
Output Devices - Monitor

Motherboard :
it is main circuit board where all the physical components that are connected directly or indirectly.
MBTX Motherboard should not work for 24hrs
Server Motherboard - there will be many servers and ram in this , so we can run this anytime. it is expensive
in Market we have 2 processor mother board and 4 processor motherboard. there is no overheating issues

Processors :
It is brain of computer.
it is semi conductor device
it contains CPU in single CHIP
it performs arithmetic and logical unit
Specifications : Hz changed to MHz to GHz
Speed - width ( 64bits or 32bits )
FSB Speed - Front side bus Speed - Tracks which are connected from Ram to Processor
Gold colour lines in Motherboard are called Tracks 
Cache Memory - chunks which are partitioned while processing the data by Memory unit .
Virtualization
Core Technology -
Processor Manufacturers - AMD and Intel like i3 or i5 or i7
RAM is divided in to Static Ram and Dynamic RAM
Dynamic RAM :
Primary Storage of computer
it is volatile memory.
Secondary storage devices :
magnetic storage devices - hard disk , tape drive ( backup )
optical storage devices - compact Disc , Digital verstaile disk (DVD ), Blu Ray Disk ( BRD )
Flash Storage devices - pend drive, memory card, SSD - solid state drive

Network 
Network is interconnnection of devices
Newtworking :
it is communication between the interconnected devices

Types of Network
LAN - Land Area Network - Network connected within the branch
MAN - Metropolitan area network - Network connected to two brances or two LAN's connected together to share the resources within City
we need ISP to connect to MAN, ISP - Internet service protocal. we will have full time connectivity or part time.
WAN - Wide area network - Network connected between two countries - we need Public internet line and it is expensive

New LAN Network setup
1.Systems - laptops, desktops, OS
2.Media - Cables - Guided Media - physcial cables - cat5 or cat6 , unguided media - using wireless devices like wifi etc.
3. Network Devices:
NIC - Network interface card - it connects between network device and Ethernet, it is physical part connected to computer or laptop.
MAC Address - Media access control address 
it is aunique identifier assigned to network interface for communications on the physical network segment.
HUB and Switch - these two are used to connect more than two PC's
we need to tell how many ports required to connect computers like 4ports or 8 ports.
To Transfer the data by using HUB or Swtich we need data packets. Data packets are of three types - Broadcast packet ( 1 to all ) - unicast packet ( 1 to 1 ) - multi cast packet ( 1 to group )
HUB - it sends the data to different computers including the sender system so there will be collision issues.
Switch - it send the data to different computers without sending it reverse to sender, it uses mac address while accepting the data packets
Router - we can connect with two countries ( WAN ) . it uses multi cast data packet. so everyone can access to data. it can connect to many devices.
4. Operating system
5. IP Address

Class : 3
OS :
OS is a program enables hardware to communicate and operate with the software.
Types of OS - Non Windows - Unix , Linux - Windows OS 
MS Dos is command based OS. it is categorized into Desktop OS ( Client OS ) and Network OS ( Server OS )
Different versions released till now in Desktop OS
win95,Win98,Win ME,Win2000Pro,Win XP,Win Vista ,Win7,Win8, Win 10. from Win95 to Win7 all are outdated.
Different versions released in Server OS
Win NT - 3.1 - 1993 , Win NT - 3.5 - 1994, Win NT - 4.0 - 1996, Win NT - 5.0 - Win 2000
Win .Net Server - Win 2003 using .net server designed by Microsoft.
Windows Server - 2008 - V .6.0 , Windows Server - 2012 - V.6.2 , Windows Server - 2016 - V.10.0
Types of Hardware Servers :
Tower Server - Small organizations - 25users 
Rack Server - Big Organizations - more than 100 users named as Data center 
Blade  Server - it is ccovered with Enclosure box - we can fix one hard disk per blade but can fix many servers.
MS OS 2012 : 
XP Home - XP applications - XP Professional , Win - Home  Win - Pro
Real Life - we can create only 2 VmWare at a time
In 2012 OS - we can create more than 2 Vm's
Data center supports allows us to create unlimited VMwares
Foundation Edition:
available only for OEM
License limited to 15 user accounts
Essentials Edition:
License limited to 25 users accounts
standard Edition :
Full windows server functionality with two virtual instances
Data Center Edition :
Full windows server functionality with unlimited virtual instances
2016 OS :
Essentials Edition - same as above
Standard Edition - same as above
Data center edition - same as above

To run all these OS we require Hardware : same for 2012 OS and 2016 OS
Processor : Min 1 processor with 1.4GHz ( 64bit )  Max : 64Processors
Note : Hyper v Compatible Processor is recommended for Standard and Data center editions like Intel VT and AMD-V
Memory - 512GB Ram , Max - 4TB Ram Available Disk space - 40 GB or Max - 80GB or greater ,  Drive - DVD ROM Drive/USB
Installation will be done by using ISO file downloaded from Microsoft website

How to go for BIOS : F2 or Delete or Ctrl+Delete , go on press F2 ,once the BIOS setup is displayed go to Boot option
select the device which we want to use the OS like Pendrive - select removable devices , for DVD - select DVD Rom drive .
To update the setting use + or - signs to apply the procedure. click to save the settings - F10 press enter.

Class : 4
Conversion of GUI to server core
Step:1
open - windows power shell
uninstall-windowsfeature server-gui-mgmt-infra, server-gui-shell - restart
Step:2
server core to GUI  power shell Enter
Install-windowsfeature server-gui-mgmt-infra, server-gui-shell - restart
Commands will be executed in CMD - Command prompt
additonal tool given by Microsoft - Power shell
To go from CMD to shell , open CMD , type powershell , press enter

Creating Local User accounts :
Click Windows+R type LUSRMGR.MSC it will open the Local users window
there will be two options - users and groups , folders in LUSR is called Containers
Right click on Users - Enter Username - Full name - password
Note : option "user must change password at next logon " should be ticked , so user can change once he or she gets new system , also if password reset done .
Age of password is 42days , after that we need to change or if not changed then reset need to be done.
if same password is to be used permanently then we need to tick option "password never expires"
if the account needs to be disabled we need to tick " account is disabled" once we enter all the info click enter.

Go to ControlPanel - search with Icon - click on add or remove icons it will display Desktop icon settings - tick Computer - users files - network recycle bin - control panel
Password Reset : go to Run - LUSRMGR.MSC - right click on Sai , set password then new password will come.
Account Deletion : go to Run - LUSRMGR.MSC - right click on Sai , delete then account will be removed permanently.

IP Addressing :
Internet protocal - IP
if we have many networks that are connected with Switch and they have NIC cards and Mac address.
we need to update the IP address to each and every computer. MAC address is physical address given for NIC card.
IP address is logical address. Two addresses - IPV4 - 32Bit    IPV6 - 128Bit
IANA - Internet assigned Network Authority
smallest value for IP - 0.0.0.0 largest value is 255.255.255.255 - as per IANA - we have 4.3 Billion addressed
they are divided in to 5 classes - A.B.C.D.E - ABC are used for LAN & WAN , Class D - Multi tasking - Class E - R & D
there will be two portions - Network and Host portions - 10.0.0.0 first one is Network portion and last digit is Host position
Class A is written as N.H.H.H - 10.0.0.0/8 N = 1 octet Class B - N.N.H.H - 10.0.0.0/16 Class C - N.N.N.H - 10.0.0.0/32
there formats can be understanded by Subnet mask - 255.0.0.0 for class A , Class B - 255.255.0.0 Class C - 255.255.255.0
There are two types of IP - Private and public , 
Class A - Starts from o to 127 class b starts from 128 to 191 class c starts from 192 to 255
























MCSE
